briefing i'm joined by dr susan hopkins
from public health england and
nhs test and trace and today i've got an
update on progress in our battle against
coronavirus
some new evidence of the effectiveness
of the vaccines
an update on cases of the brazilian
variant
of concern and extra funding to support
mental health in
schools because of course on monday that
marks our first step in the opening up
after this lockdown next week classrooms
will once again be
buzzing with activity and i know
that parents across england will be
delighted
and i'm sure relieved that all children
are going back to school also from
monday
i'm just so pleased that we're able to
reopen
care homes to visiting we've put in
place a really
careful policy so each care home
resident
will be able to register a single
regular visitor who'll be tested
and wear ppe but be able to visit and i
know that this means
so much to hundreds of thousands of
people
with a loved one in a care home and to
those who
live in care homes and i'm really really
glad that we're able to make this step
so first let's turn to the latest
coronavirus data
and this data shows the progress we've
made including
more evidence on the impact of the
vaccine
in saving lives if i could have the
first slide please
here you can see the number of cases of
covid19 and i'm pleased
to say that the cases are still falling
the average daily number of cases is
6685 the lowest
since late september and the weekly case
rate
across the uk is now 84 per
hundred thousand people the latest
figures from the office for national
statistics that were published earlier
today report a further
significant decline they show that in
england
one in 220 people have coronavirus
a fall from one in 145
last week this is all encouraging news
and it should give us confidence
that we can safely take the steps that
we're taking on monday next slide please
slide two shows the hospital admissions
with covid
and it shows that they are falling too
there are still
12 136 people
in hospital in the uk with covid that's
still
too high but the average number of new
admissions to hospital
is 900 the lowest since
october next slide please thankfully
the number of deaths with covert are
also declining
steeply the average number of deaths per
day is 248
also the lowest since october and here
the decline
is in fact accelerating the halving time
of the number of deaths has come down
from 19 days so the number of deaths
each day
halving every 19 days last month to
halving every 11 days now
not only that there are now fewer people
dying
from all courses in care homes than is
normal for this
time of year taken together these three
slides
show that we're heading in the right
direction although that there is further
to go and what we can
also see in the data across the whole uk
is that the vaccine program is working
to protect the nhs
and saving lives if we go on to the next
slide
the best way to see this is by looking
at how fast
cases hospital admissions and deaths
are falling the number of cases have
been falling in a fairly even way
since around the middle of january and
by a quarter every week and just a
little bit more
in the last few days it's not been
completely smooth as you can see from
the slide
a week ago i stood here we stood here
and we said that we were worried that
the fall in cases
was slowing down thankfully as you can
see in the chart that now looks
more like a temporary blip which is good
news for us all
next slide please now let's turn to the
number of hospital admissions
again this is falling steadily at
just under 30 percent every week but
there are signs that this fall
is getting a bit faster as you can see
from the last
week's data there and in fact the 29
fall in the last week is the fastest
fall
in hospital admissions at any point
in the entire pandemic if we go to the
final slide please
where you can really see the effect of
the vaccine is in the fall in the number
of deaths the number of deaths is
falling faster and faster
and now deaths are falling by over a
third each week
and in fact in the last week have fallen
by 41
they're falling faster than before now
the chief medical officer told us weeks
ago that you'd first see the effect of
the vaccine
in fewer people dying and then in
reduced hospitalizations
and i believe that that is exactly what
is happening
what this all shows is that the link
from cases to hospitalizations and then
to deaths
that had been unbreakable before the
vaccine
that link is now breaking the vaccine
is protecting the nhs and saving lives
and right across the country
the country's plan is working as well as
this
real world data i want to share the
results of a study by the university of
bristol
which clearly shows the difference the
vaccination program is making this study
looked at
all patients over 80 who were admitted
with serious respiratory disease in
bristol
and the results showed that a single
dose of both
the pfizer or the oxford astrazeneca jab
offers around 80 protection against
hospitalization after
at least two weeks even amongst the most
frail and those with underlying medical
conditions
again as with the data on this that were
published last week
the effect was slightly stronger in the
oxford jab
than with pfizer and what this
corroborates
is what we have seen over the past
couple of weeks the
hard evidence that vaccines work
they're the best way of securing our
freedom because they're the best way of
protecting us
as of midnight last night 21.3 million
people had been vaccinated
and i can tell you for the first time
that we have vaccinated now two-fifths
of the entire adult population of the
united kingdom
yesterday i was in scotland seeing the
combined teamwork of nhs scotland and
scottish local authorities and the armed
forces
delivering jabs in hamilton and they
were all working together as one
towards a common goal of protecting us
all and
as anybody who's been to a vaccination
center will know that
the joy on people's faces as they get
the jab is unbelievably
uplifting and more and more people will
be getting this
feeling of protection over the next few
weeks and months we're on course to hit
our target
of offering a first dose to everyone
who's over 50 or part of an at-risk
group
by the 15th of april and all adults by
the end of july
the vaccine rollout has allowed us to
set out our roadmap
for how we'll carefully lift some of the
restrictions that we've all endured
for far too long and as we do this we'll
be drawing on the huge
testing infrastructure that's now in
place and i just want to spend a moment
on this we're now testing 2.8 million
people a week
the roadmap is built on the principle of
replacing the protection that comes from
lockdown
with the protection that comes from
vaccines and regular testing
so as we open up for instance care homes
as i mentioned a moment ago
to visitors that will come with regular
testing
for visitors and as schools and colleges
return
we'll be giving teachers staff parents
secondary
and college students and their
households access to rapid
regular testing twice a week in term
time
and in holidays and i urge all those
and the households of those who are
going back to school or to college next
week
to take up this offer one of the most
dangerous things about this virus
one of the most dangerous things is that
around a third of those who get it
don't get any symptoms at all and yet
can still
pass the disease on to others that's why
it's so important
that all of us follow the social
distancing
and take the precautions that we know we
must
rapid regular testing is a critical part
of our response and as we do so much
more
we can do more because of the huge
capacity built up by nhs test and trace
so i would urge you if you're eligible
to participate in one of these
regular testing programs like i do
because that is how we will keep this
virus under control
as we continue to roll out the vaccine
for more information go to gov dot uk
forward slash coronavirus and i'd urge
everybody who's eligible to get
that regular testing now
i know also that this pandemic has been
an anxious time for so many
young people and i just want to spend a
moment on this after all
growing up is tough enough even at the
best of times
so in these very difficult times it's
been
even tougher homeschooling being unable
to meet up with friends
not having regular sport being stuck at
home
i know just how much people are looking
forward to going back to school
to sing friends in the classroom
properly
rather than just on zoom monday will be
a long awaited day for many people
but for some it's also a moment of
unease and
anxiety we need to make sure we get the
help
to young people to help them get through
this
and get life going again and give them
the support that they need
we've worked hard throughout the
pandemic to make sure mental health
services
stay open we've set up 24 7 support for
those in need
and i'm delighted to be able to announce
today that we'll be allocating an extra
79 million pounds
to boost mental health support for
children and young people
almost 3 million people will benefit
from more mental health support teams
children and young people and those
mental health support teams in schools
will be working hard to ensure people
get access to the
support and care that they need and
we'll be expanding access to mental
health services in the community too
i'd like to end with some good news on
our work
to tackle new variants thanks to the
brilliant team
who've been working so hard over the
past week we've now
successfully identified the sixth case
of the variant of concern first
identified in
manaus in brazil using the latest
technology
and with the dogged determination of our
testing and tracing scheme
we've successfully identified the person
in question
the best evidence is that this person
in question stayed at home and there's
no
sign that there's been any onward
transmission
but as a precaution we're putting more
testing in in croydon
where they live to minimize the risk of
spread this
positive outcome was only possible
because of the huge genomic sequencing
capacity that we now have in this
country
and because of our test and trace team
so they could identify these cases track
them down
contact them and it shows the importance
of this capability that we've built
and how important it is also to be
transparent
when new variants are found because
whether it's here at home
or around the world testing sequencing
and being transparent about what you
find helps stop
the spread of this disease and in
particular
these variants of concern that are so
worrying
so i'm really really delighted that the
team have done this work they've worked
absolutely flat out since these six
cases were first
identified on friday
and found the six positive cases
even though the form wasn't filled in
quite right so
susan's going to say a little bit more
about this in a moment but my summary is
that this is
these things are moving in the right
direction these are
challenging times but thanks to the
vaccine we're making progress we're not
there yet
so as we go down the road to recovery
it's vital everybody
still plays their part follows the rules
and of course when the call comes
get your jab dr hopkins thank you
so i'm giving you a little bit more
detail on what we've done for the
investigation to find the individual in
question
on friday the 26th of february we
identified three cases
in england of p1 the variant first
described in manaas brazil
as we know now one of the individuals
had attempted to register his test
online
but had failed to do so effectively
specialist teams from nhs test and trace
in public health england
immediately launched an investigation to
identify the individual concerned
an instant team of 40 people from across
the system
made up of laboratories logistics data
analytics expert was mobilized to trace
the individual
the team began with very little
information as of sunday morning they
had a single barcode and a date
and time the test was processed at the
cambridge lighthouse laboratory
using the barcode data they established
that it was delivered through the dhl
service for home deliveries the testing
trace deliver
many thousands of kits across the week
to the uk
and now they were looking at
sequentially when this test was
delivered
and where this was delivered to
comparing it to other tests
that were in the system they worked
backwards
from when it arrived in the laboratory
to where they had cut which
um testing hub it had come from um and
backwards through the postal service
the intelligence was then overlaid with
the geographical spread
to look for the correlation of
sequential barcodes and the regions it
had been distributed to
this narrowed it down to two regions and
ten thousand
hot possible households once the team
had combined the region
and the time window experts tracked down
every single distribution center
and then filtered it down further down
to
379 households at this point
enhanced contact tracing kicked in with
call handlers
calling emailing and phoning all of the
individuals that could have received a
test
in that time interval these calls
narrowed it down to 27 individuals
who received further calls further texts
further messages
and on wednesday at 3 pm an individual
phoned the 119 service they were able to
give the missing barcode number that
they had held securely for the whole
time
this individual has been interviewed
extensively and lives within a household
that had recently returned from brazil
and all had quarantined at home further
precautionary testing will occur in the
neighborhood
and we've already started testing all of
the samples from the neighborhood
through whole genome sequencing to
ensure that there's no further
distribution of cases in the community
this is a testament to the nhs test and
trace teams
the call handlers and the public health
england health protection team
working together to find an individual
and prevent further transmission
thank you thanks very much susan first
we're going to go to questions from the
public
and then from the media the first
question by video
is from andrew from durham
good afternoon the past 12 months have
identified
current and future mental health
challenges and also an opportunity to
improve
what will the government be doing around
the current mental health challenges
how will they be approaching mental
health and well-being for the future
especially mental health and well-being
in young children in schools
thank you well andrew it's a very
pertinent question because
it's an incredibly important challenge
and it's clear that
the measures that we've had to take in
the last year and the lockdown have had
a significant effect on
some people and we make need to make
sure that we
respond to that and support
our mental health professionals who've
been working incredibly hard
and i would say that the response is in
three parts
the first is to support those who are
currently working
very hard to deliver mental health
services
and in particular we've seen a rise in
presentations of serious mental ill
health and
making sure that our our mental health
teams have the support to respond
to those cases in a timely fashion is
incredibly important
the second has been to expand the number
of people who can get access
to mental health services to support
those
who may have a challenge with their
mental health
which can be addressed through services
like
talking therapies so-called iap
therapies
and other online services which we've
expanded
massively during the pandemic and the
third
is something that we've announced
further funding to today an extra 79
million to support
children and young people's mental
health especially as they go back to
school
and this will be linked support workers
who
link schools with local mental health
services
because it's not just about the serious
mental ill health although that is
obviously
absolutely critical it's about making
sure that
everybody gets the support to strengthen
their mental health and this is
something
everybody can do in the same way that
you know even fit and healthy people
go out to strengthen their physical
health
you know i was out running in the park
this morning
everybody can take steps to support
their mental health
and to make sure that your mental health
stays strong
and this there's a range of tools
available from the every mind matters
tool which public health england have
developed which is
excellent all the way through to the
array of
nhs mental health services that are
available
we've put in the extra money to make
sure that there is that link
between children and young people who
have challenges with their mental health
who present at school
making sure they can then get access to
services so that services are accessible
to them so thank you very much for the
question very timely and
i i hope that i've given a full answer
the next question is from hannah from
cornwall
in order to allow shielding teenagers
the chance to return to school with
their peers
has the government considered widening
the criteria
for which under-16s are eligible for the
vaccine
thank you very much hannah i'm going to
ask dr hopkins to set out more details
because the clinical details are what
matters here
but it but if a a child's
clinician judges that because of their
condition
it is appropriate from to get them to
get the vaccine that
is allowed within the rules and
um that is but it has to be down to the
judgment of an individual
clinician so just just to add so jcvi as
you know have recommended that 16 to 18
year olds
who are in the clinically extremely
vulnerable group can be offered the
vaccine
and i in groups under that age group it
really is a decision for the
general practitioner or the specialist
in charge of that child's care
we have very little data for children
yet and further data will come through
from both studies in children and our
monitoring process for any child who's
given a vaccine
but this really is an important decision
that needs to be driven by the
experts involved in the child's care
thanks hannah that's a
very important question and the critical
thing is
it is allowed where the child's
clinician thinks it's in their
best interests the next question is from
vicky young at the bbc
health secretary you stood at that
podium in may last year and said that
nursing deserved
fair reward is a one percent rise
fair and secondly on we've been hearing
a lot about vaccine hesitancy
uh in some places do you think that it's
now
a case that there's a case for mandatory
vaccination of nhs staff
thanks very much vicky well i pay
tribute again to the incredible work of
all those who working in the nhs
especially over the last
a few months during this second peak and
it's been
it's been incredible as i said in my
opening remarks
these have been challenging times and
one of the challenges that we face as a
country
is in terms of the financial
consequences of the pandemic
and so the evidence that was put forward
yesterday
was on the basis of affordability
now of course elsewhere in the public
sector there's a
pay freeze in place and we've proposed
what we think is affordable
to make sure that in the nhs people do
get
a pay rise and i think it is fair to
take into account
all of the considerations the incredible
hard work of
those in the nhs which means that they
are not part of the overall
public sector pay freeze and also what's
affordable
as a nation and that's the basis on
which we've taken the decision
when it comes to vaccination obviously
i'd urge
everybody in the nhs to get the the
vaccine
and we have seen the take-up increase
i would like to continue to pursue
that because i think that is the
um that is the best way to ensure
that we get as high coverage as we can
without having to bring in a mandatory
vaccination we are not going to bring in
mandatory vaccination
across the board and at this stage we
are not proposing
and to bring in mandatory vaccination
for nhs staff
but as you know there is a review
into the these questions that's being
led by my
friend the chancellor of the duchy of
lancaster
and it will look into the moral ethical
and practical questions about all of
these
issues thanks very much vicky libby
veena at itv
good afternoon health secretary um there
are still 12 000 people
being treated for covid in hospital uh
that you've mentioned
uh how hard did you fight for a more
generous
payoff for those who are looking after
them and how hard are you prepared to
continue to fight
for those nhs workers and can i ask dr
dr hopkins um how effective do you
believe the astrazeneca vaccine is
against the brazilian variant
well libby as you know i am a huge
admirer
of all those who've worked in the nhs
during this pandemic
and done so much and i'm very pleased
that
the nhs staff have been carved out of
the pay freeze
and we do have
issues of the affordability because of
the consequences of the pandemic
on the public finances which were set
out in the budget this week
and we have to take those into account
but we have been able to carve out the
nhs
from the pay freeze that applies
to everybody else in the public sector
and i'll hand over to dr hopkins for the
second question
thank you so from the point of view of
astrazeneca we do not yet have
laboratory or
clinical data to show the vaccine
effectiveness
or or neutralization studies for the p1
variant from brazil
however as you know we we have some data
from b1351 the variant that first
emerged in south africa
and we expect that it should at least
perform in a similar way
um and therefore that we think that it's
likely that there may be some reduction
in risk of transmission or reducing the
risk of transmission
but we at least hope at the moment that
it will have a strong impact in reducing
hospitalizations and deaths
we do need to wait for studies to come
out from south america and in particular
brazil
and those will come but it will take
weeks rather than days i'm afraid
thanks very much next question is ashish
joshi
from sky good afternoon health secretary
good afternoon
dr hopkins health secretary there'll be
people at home who've just listened to
what you've said
and will be incredulous at the language
you've used this
brilliant success of taking a week to
find
one individual what does that say about
our test and trace system
a year on into the pandemic and dr
hopkins
how helpful would it be to you and your
colleagues
if we closed our borders now uh on the
first question
i think it's an absolute tribute to the
team
at nhs test and trace and public health
england
and all those who've been involved in
this search
that despite the fact that this case
was one of the very very few where the
correct
details weren't uh weren't attached
to the test itself which happens in 99.9
percent of cases
that despite the fact it was in that 0.1
percent where that doesn't happen
they managed to track down this
individual and i think it's reassuring
that all the evidence shows that that
individual and all
six three in scotland three in england
uh that we have the
where we found this uh variant of
concern
followed the rules and we
obviously have put then put in the
testing
around that and the final point i'd make
on this before handing over to dr
hopkins
is we wouldn't know about any of this
without the huge testing capacity
and the sequencing capacity you know we
sequence uh just
under half of all these genetic
sequences
in the world uh in this country because
of that capacity that we've built
um and in fact i was in glasgow
yesterday i was seeing
the expansion of that sequencing
which there which we're putting in place
to to increase it further
it's only because of that capacity that
we were able to find these six
in most other countries in the world we
simply wouldn't have known that that had
happened
and therefore we were able to track all
six down
dr hopkins thank you so i think the uh
challenge about borders is that
people coming into this country at the
moment and leaving should only be doing
it for essential reasons and as you know
only people who have a british residency
or a british passport can come in from
many countries right now
in addition the day two and the day
eight tests while people are in
quarantine
give us extra reassurance of being able
to detect cases
and we are also whole genome sequencing
any of those that can be sequenced
uh all of that is really positive
because it allows us to find any of
these variants coming into the country
earlier trace any of their contacts
trace people on flights as we did for
the previous cases
and that gives us a lot of reassurance
that even with small numbers of
individuals coming into the country
that we can minimize the risk to the
public health and the population
thanks very much next question nigel
morris from the eye nigel
secretary of state the pm said
all the way back in july 2019
that the government had already made
plan for fixing the
wrong running crisis and social care
funding and yet his press secretary said
yesterday that you still had no
detailed proposals on the issue could
you finally
give us a firm date when your social
care reform plans will be produced
and update us on what uh cross-party
contacts have taken place
following your call for cross-party
consensus on the issue
and secondly very quickly could i ask
was consideration given to
a one-off bonus to nhs staff as
is happening in scotland and if so why
was the idea rejected
well thanks very much the um the
obviously
solving the social care funding issue
has been a long-standing problem we have
a clear manifesto commitment to deliver
on that
and we intend to publish details of
how we plan to do that this year
i've been working with the prime
minister on it
clearly before the pandemic we were
starting to work immediately after the
election on this
we we did engage then in cross-party
engagement i put out a call as you
mentioned for cross-party
suggestions and input we've received
quite a lot of that and that's been part
of our considerations
and i hope that we can come forward with
a plan that
can work and can carry
public broad consensus now it is more
challenging to deliver this
in more difficult economic times
that is obvious and clear what we need
to do though
is put in place a long-term plan that
will bring about a
solution to this problem at the same
time
there are many many other improvements
to the delivery of social care that we
can make
as well as addressing this issue of the
funding reform
and many of those are contained in the
white paper that i set out
last month uh on which there'll be a
bill in due course
and to bring an integration between
health and social care
formally and much more so than we've had
uh until now
because that is part of the solution
to this uh significant problem
and even that part of the solution the
integration of health and social care
is an issue that's eluded governments of
all stripes
over many many years and i'm absolutely
delighted to have been able to set out
that white paper
and uh to bring forward the bill in due
course
um on the um on the second party i've
completely forgotten your second
question i should have written
it down sorry one off bonus for scots oh
yes um the
the the of course um the uh
administration in edinburgh uh take
their decisions in terms of uh in terms
of how they run
at the nhs that isn't the approach
that we have chosen to take here
and obviously the matters of pay will
will go to the pay review body
but we have set out what is affordable
given the very significant challenges to
the public finances
next question is john johnson from
politics home
good afternoon health secretary uh two
quick questions if i may
um earlier today the scottish
conservative leader
douglas ross said the test and trace in
the early stages of the pandemic
uh did not work as well as it should
have and that he believed
government ministers would accept that
do you
accept that analysis and if not why not
and secondly conservative mps including
the chair of the education select
committee have called
for further evidence to be published
over the weekend
regarding the use of face masks in
schools
do you have any plans to explain to
parents and teachers why that guidance
has been issued
to reassure them that when pupils go
back on monday
that they're making the right decision
by asking children to wear face masks
thanks john on that second question i'm
going to ask susan to give a clinical
answer
on the first question of course at the
start of this pandemic
a test and trace didn't exist we had
we developed the first test public
health england did that
and they did it within a about a month
of first discovering about this virus
in the first place um so of course
there's been a
program of constant improvement and it's
testament to that improvement that we
now have
turnaround times of under 24 hours in
the vast majority of tests right across
the uk we have this huge sequencing
capacity which is
the biggest in the world as a proportion
of our population
by a huge margin we have
contact racing that reaches over
90 of positive cases and over 90
of their of their contacts and again
very very
rapid speeds which is a an incredible
achievement of the team to have built
all of this
it means that we are in a better place
to deal with a pandemic like this
than before and it's been because we've
built it all the way through
that's been a very important part of
what we've uh
of what we've had to do and i've spoken
on at this podium
many times about the work that's gone on
to make all of that happen
susan thank you so our face coverings
and face masks
we have reviewed the evidence and the
and also looked at the
variant that we have circulating b117 it
was with that variant and with the
increased transmissions
that we were seeing around the school
environment not just in the school but
on the way to school especially in
secondary schools
that the advice to for secondary school
children to wear masks in the classroom
and in corridors whilst moving around
the school came
as part of the advice package to reduce
the risk in secondary schools
on the return on march the 8th that goes
hand in hand with the testing
that we're advising schools to do to
also reduce the risk
along with all of the other measures the
schools have put into play
and this is all there to reduce the risk
of transmission in schools to allow our
children to
continue their education safely and to
ensure that we have
the least amount of rises that we can
possibly hope for
with increased mixing around return to
schools next week
thanks very much susan final question
megan ford from the nursing times good
evening
nurses are considering industrial action
and others may quit altogether following
the news
that they might receive just a one
percent pay rise after a year of covered
19.
so my question is how do you expect to
stabilize the nhs and complete the
vaccination program without nurses on
the ground
well megan it's an incredibly important
point that we need
more nurses not just the nurses that we
have now and we have a
clear manifesto commitment to 50 000
more nurses in the nhs
and i'm delighted that there's more than
10 000 more nurses
who've joined the nhs over the last 12
months
also we've seen an increase in 34
percent of more than a third in the
applications
to nursing and of course over the past
three years
uh nurses have had a 12
pay rise and i bow to nobody in my
admiration
for nurses in fact you know i
learned that at the knee of my
grandmother who was a nurse
and work nights at the uh at the pilgrim
hospital in
boston the the challenge is that the
nation's finances are
tight and whilst everybody else in the
public sector
is going to have a pay freeze we are
able to give a uh to propose a pay
rise for nurses at one percent i
entirely appreciate that that reflects
the difficult financial circumstances
that the
country is in but what i'd say to every
every nurse who's watching and everybody
who has worked so hard
is we have over this pandemic pulled
together
in an incredible way and i really hope
that we can continue doing that
both to deliver for patients and also to
support our nhs
and to welcome many many more nurses
into the nhs over the years ahead
thanks very much megan and thanks to all
that ends today's coronavirus briefing
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news